Synopsis
========

::

  $ ch-fromhost [OPTION ...] [FILE_OPTION ...] IMGDIR


Description
===========

.. note::

   This command is experimental. Features may be incomplete and/or buggy.
   Please report any issues you find, so we can fix them!

Inject files from the host into the Charliecloud image directory
:code:`IMGDIR`.

The purpose of this command is to provide host-specific files, such as GPU
libraries, to a container. It should be run after :code:`ch-tar2dir` and
before :code:`ch-run`. After invocation, the image is no longer portable to
other hosts.

Injection is not atomic; if an error occurs partway through injection, the
image is left in an undefined state. Injection is currently implemented using
a simple file copy, but that may change in the future.

By default, file paths that contain the string :code:`/bin` are assumed to be
executables and are placed in :code:`/usr/bin` within the container. File
paths that contain the strings :code:`/lib` or :code:`.so` are assumed to be
shared libraries and are placed in the first-priority directory reported by
:code:`ldconfig` (see :code:`--lib-path` below). Other files are placed in the
directory specified by :code:`--dest`.

If any shared libraries are injected, run :code:`ldconfig` inside the
container (using :code:`ch-run -w`) after injection.


Options
=======

To specify which files to inject
--------------------------------

  :code:`-c`, :code:`--cmd CMD`
    Inject files listed in the standard output of command :code:`CMD`.

  :code:`-f`, :code:`--file FILE`
    Inject files listed in the file :code:`FILE`.

  :code:`-p`, :code:`--path PATH`
    Inject the file at :code:`PATH`.

  :code:`--cray-mpi`
    Cray-enable an MPICH installed inside the image. See important details
    below.

  :code:`--nvidia`
    Use :code:`nvidia-container-cli list` (from :code:`libnvidia-container`)
    to find executables and libraries to inject.

These can be repeated, and at least one must be specified.

To specify the destination within the image
-------------------------------------------

  :code:`-d`, :code:`--dest DST`
    Place files specified later in directory :code:`IMGDIR/DST`, overriding the
    inferred destination, if any. If a file's destination cannot be inferred
    and :code:`--dest` has not been specified, exit with an error. This can be
    repeated to place files in varying destinations.

Additional arguments
--------------------

  :code:`--lib-path`
    Print the guest destination path for shared libraries inferred as
    described above.

  :code:`--no-ldconfig`
    Don't run :code:`ldconfig` even if we appear to have injected shared
    libraries.

  :code:`-h`, :code:`--help`
    Print help and exit.

  :code:`-v`, :code:`--verbose`
    List the injected files.

  :code:`--version`
    Print version and exit.


:code:`--cray-mpi` prerequisites and quirks
===========================================

The implementation of :code:`--cray-mpi` for MPICH is messy, foul smelling,
and brittle. It replaces or overrides the open source MPICH libraries
installed in the container. Users should be aware of the following.

1. Containers must have the following software installed:

   a. Open source `MPICH <https://www.mpich.org/>`_.

   b. `PatchELF with our patches <https://github.com/hpc/patchelf>`_. Use the
      :code:`shrink-soname` branch.

   c. :code:`libgfortran.so.3`, because Cray's :code:`libmpi.so.12` links to
      it.

2. Applications must be linked to :code:`libmpi.so.12` (not e.g.
   :code:`libmpich.so.12`). How to configure MPICH to accomplish this is not
   yet clear to us; :code:`test/Dockerfile.mpich` does it, while the Debian
   packages do not.

3. One of the :code:`cray-mpich-abi` modules must be loaded when
   :code:`ch-fromhost` is invoked.

4. Tested only for C programs compiled with GCC, and it probably won't work
   otherwise. If you'd like to use another compiler or another programming
   language, please get in touch so we can implement the necessary support.

Please file a bug if we missed anything above or if you know how to make the
code better.


Notes
=====

Symbolic links are dereferenced, i.e., the files pointed to are injected, not
the links themselves.

As a corollary, do not include symlinks to shared libraries. These will be
re-created by :code:`ldconfig`.

There are two alternate approaches for nVidia GPU libraries:

  1. Link :code:`libnvidia-containers` into :code:`ch-run` and call the
     library functions directly. However, this would mean that Charliecloud
     would either (a) need to be compiled differently on machines with and
     without nVidia GPUs or (b) have :code:`libnvidia-containers` available
     even on machines without nVidia GPUs. Neither of these is consistent with
     Charliecloud's philosophies of simplicity and minimal dependencies.

  2. Use :code:`nvidia-container-cli configure` to do the injecting. This
     would require that containers have a half-started state, where the
     namespaces are active and everything is mounted but :code:`pivot_root(2)`
     has not been performed. This is not feasible because Charliecloud has no
     notion of a half-started container.

Further, while these alternate approaches would simplify or eliminate this
script for nVidia GPUs, they would not solve the problem for other situations.


Bugs
====

File paths may not contain colons or newlines.


Examples
========

Place shared library :code:`/usr/lib64/libfoo.so` at path
:code:`/usr/lib/libfoo.so` (assuming :code:`/usr/lib` is the first directory
searched by the dynamic loader in the image), within the image
:code:`/var/tmp/baz` and executable :code:`/bin/bar` at path
:code:`/usr/bin/bar`. Then, create appropriate symlinks to :code:`libfoo` and
update the :code:`ld.so` cache.

::

  $ cat qux.txt
  /bin/bar
  /usr/lib64/libfoo.so
  $ ch-fromhost --file qux.txt /var/tmp/baz

Same as above::

  $ ch-fromhost --cmd 'cat qux.txt' /var/tmp/baz

Same as above::

  $ ch-fromhost --path /bin/bar --path /usr/lib64/libfoo.so /var/tmp/baz

Same as above, but place the files into :code:`/corge` instead (and the shared
library will not be found by :code:`ldconfig`)::

  $ ch-fromhost --dest /corge --file qux.txt /var/tmp/baz

Same as above, and also place file :code:`/etc/quux` at :code:`/etc/quux`
within the container::

  $ ch-fromhost --file qux.txt --dest /etc --path /etc/quux /var/tmp/baz

Inject the executables and libraries recommended by nVidia into the image, and
then run :code:`ldconfig`::

  $ ch-fromhost --nvidia /var/tmp/baz


Acknowledgements
================

This command was inspired by the similar `Shifter
<http://www.nersc.gov/research-and-development/user-defined-images/>`_ feature
that allows Shifter containers to use the Cray Aires network. We particularly
appreciate the help provided by Shane Canon and Doug Jacobsen during our
implementation of :code:`--cray-mpi`.

We appreciate the advice of Ryan Olson at nVidia on implementing
:code:`--nvidia`.


..  LocalWords:  libmpi libmpich nvidia
